Welcome to the session on shell variables.
In this session will be learning about how
to print the variables that are defined and
made available in the shell that we are using
in the terminal environment. Why do we need
to know about the shell variables usually
it is possible to communicate between two
processes for tiny bits of information very
efficiently using shell variables.
It does not require you to write or read file
system which could be intensive in terms of
the operations and often there are also security
concerns that some information that you write
to the file system may be visible to such
other processes which are able to read the
file system. Shell variables are available
only within the shell or its child processes
if you enabled the export option and thereby
the information that is stored in shell variables
is fairly private to the shell.
Shell variables are also a means by which
you could store information as an intermediate
form for you to process further. Certain processes
such as commercial software that expect the
license server or the port number on which
the license is available and so on may be
looking for certain shell variables to have
that information. And therefore even when
you do not use the terminal environment very
extensively it could be necessary for you
to know about the shell variables.
So, to be able to what are the variables defined
in the shelf what are the values that they
contain how to define those variables and
modify them would be part of our exercise
and today we will see how to just display
what are the variables that are available
for us in the shelf.
In this session we will be extensively used
the command echo. The echo command prints
out the value of a shell variable or a string
that is supplied on the command on screen
for example as you can see you could print
hello world using a single line like echo
hello world and you will see that the string
hello world will come out of the screen. You
could also print the values of certain variables
that are there in the shell environment by
using the echo command.
And we would notice that there is a convention
to store the names of variables in the shell
every shell variable will start with a dollar.
There are certain frequently used shell variables
such as the user name the home directory the
host name are the name of the machine on which
this particular shell is running and the present
working directory which will keep changing
its value as you keep navigating through the
file system. So, the path variable contains
a list of directories which will be searched
for when you type a command.
So, there are certain commands available such
as printed or env or set which can help you
see what all the shell variables that are
already available and defined in the shell
that you are using. There are some special
shell variables such as the dollar zero which
will give you the name of the show and then
double dollar which will give you the process
id of the shell we will see what does it mean
by a process id shortly and dollar question
mark which will give you the exit code of
the program which just executed.
Dollar hyphen will tell you what are the flags
that were set by launching the batch shell
that you are using currently.
We will also see certain process control whereby
you could run a program in the background
and then you can bring it again back to the
foreground you could run a command while also
being able to go on to use the shell. You
could also list what are the programs that
are running in the background using the jobs
comment you could see what are the programs
that are hogging the memory or cp utilization
in your computer uh and it is refreshed uh
every second you could look at it using the
top command.
You could kill some processes which are owned
by you using the kill command. So, we would
actually start exploring the job control starting
with the special shell variable double dollar.
When it comes to the program exit codes it
is a matter of convention that the exit code
should convey in what way the program has
ended. And exit code like zero would convey
that the program has been successfully executed
and that is universal it would evaluate to
true if you were to use it as a Boolean variable
while checking whether the command has successfully
executed or not.
And values one or above are used to convey
certain amount of value in running that program.
The value of one as written code would mean
that the command has failed and whatever is
the reason would be displayed on the screen
and exit code like two would also mean failure
but for slightly different reasons sometimes
for misuse of shell bulletin or perhaps when
the permissions are not adequate.
Written code of 126 is used when the command
could not be executed perhaps because it is
not an executable and if you try to run a
command and it could not be located within
the list of directories specified by the part
variable then you would have an error code
which is 127. The exit code 130 is used when
the program that was running in the foreground
has been killed using the control C operation.
If a process exited because it was killed
by using the kill command using the option
-9 then it would have an exit code of 137.
If the exit code happens to be more than 256
then the modulo of value with what 256 would
be reported as the exit code. So, that the
exit code is always having a value between
zero and 255. We will explore each of these
exit codes by running appropriate comments
to ensure such an exit code would be reported
and thereby you will understand how the written
codes are coming up.
When a shell is launched it would be launched
with certain options that are already set
and some of these options are like the option
h which is to locate and hash or memorize
the comments that are being executed. The
option capital B to enable what is called
the brace expansion we will see a demonstration
of that. This small letter I to indicate that
it is in an interactive mode.
The small letter m to indicate that the job
control has been enabled that is the jobs
can be taken to foreground or background etc.
The option capital H is to enable the history
operations such that using the bang or asterisks
and then a numerical value you could actually
repeat the comment that was executed slightly
in the past. The option small s would be used
when the comments are supposed to be read
from the standard input by that what we mean
is when we type using the keyboard.
The option small c is used when the comments
to be executed are to be read from the argument
passed on to the batch beyond what is given
as options. We will use these options to understand
the output of dollar hyphen special shell
variable.
Let us get started with the shell variables
as we have seen echo is the command. So, let
us see what type of a command that is. So,
I will type man echo to know more about that
and you see that the man paid says that echo
command is to display a line of text. And
so let us try that out. So, we would say hello
world and you would see that the string has
been reproduced.
Now I would type hello world with multiple
spaces in between and you will see that you
will still get only one space which means
that the echo command is looking at what is
supplied as an argument and picking up words
from there and using a single space as a delimiter
and then displaying them on the screen. Now
if you want to actually have more spaces then
you would have to enclose the string in quotes.
So, you can now see that the number of spaces
that we gave has been kept intact. So, it
actually is a lesson that the echo command
when it is applied with an argument that does
not contain the quotes then it would actually
treat the words as separate values which would
be taken as a list and then they will be displayed
with one space between and therefore if you
provide multiple spaces then they will be
ignored.
What happens when you do not match the quotes
properly. So, you would see that you are being
prompted with a different prompt string which
is just the right angle bracket it means that
the shell is now expecting you to finish the
command with the matching double quote and
until that point it would actually keep asking
you. So, I would actually ask now I can actually
give some more input and if you keep asking
that.
So, I closed a single quote but that does
not help because we have started a double
quote and we have to finish the double quote.
And now you see that the command has been
completed but meanwhile you have noticed that
the string the entire string has been read
and you have all the four lines coming up
onto the screen. So, this is also a lesson
to learn two things one is that you can in
fact enter a multiline input to the echo command.
In case the shell was expecting you to complete
the command it would prompt you on every new
line using the right angle bracket until you
complete the command as per the quotes that
are matching. So, let us try with the single
quotes
and they would also work
and here now the matching quotations required
are single quotes. So, I would actually finish
the double quote but that does not finish
the command.
So, now you see that the single quote when
it is given the command is completed and therefore
you now have all the three lines being displayed.
So, which means that whatever is the first
quote that you started that has to be finished
and along the way we have opened another pair
of quotes that does not matter. So, let us
clear the screen now. So, the echo command
that way is very nice in reproducing whatever
text that you are giving either it is a single
line or multiline.
And usually in a shell script you would actually
use it to display lines of text that would
help in documentation. For example you may
want to have a command which would actually
display a line sometimes you may want to give
some comments
and sometimes you just need to display a plane
text. So, you could use the echo command like
the print of command in c language liberally.
Let us clear the screen now.
Now you can use the echo command to also display
values of shell variables and as we mentioned
earlier every shell variable starts with the
dollar simple. So, the very first variable
would be to display the user name the user
who is logged on and you would see that the
user name is displayed on the screen. You
could also enclose the shell variable within
double quotes and it would be interpreted
and then displayed.
What happens if you use it in the single quotes?
You see that the string that we gave was displayed
as it is but it was not interpreted to give
you the value of that particular shell variable
which means now you see the difference between
the single quotes and double quotes within
the double quotes any string that comes with
a dollar will be interpreted as a shell variable
and if a value is available for that that
value will be substituted and then printed.
And if you have the same thing in a single
quote then it was it is not going to be interpreted.
So, you could also mix certain other strings
along with this shell variables within the
double quotes. So, now you can see that we
are trying to print a string followed by the
value of the shell variable user name and
it comes out quite. So, there are many more
such uh useful shell variables let us look
at each.
So, dollar user is also the same as the user
name dollar home is the home directory let
us look at the value of the shell variable
pwd. So, it would have the value of the present
working directory. So, if you type the command
pwd in small letters it would have the same
value and you could now change the directory
and test it out. So, I go to let us say user
and I will check ok.
So, you see that the value of the shell variable
pwd and the output of the command pwd in small
letters is the same and it would be the present
working directory and you can navigate within
the file system hierarchy and you can try
it out at any location and it would be the
current location that currently the command
execution is being performed. You could always
inquire the name of the machine using the
host name shell variable and that would be
the name of the machine as given in a file
called etc host name.
And it would be a static file if the configuration
was like that and it can also be made dynamic
if you had the network settings so configured.
Now let us say we want to print a string where
we would some of the variables to be interpreted
but not certain others which means that you
do not have a choice to pick the single quotes
or double quotes you need the double quotes
because you want some of the variables to
be interpreted but ah you want some of the
variables to be escaped.
So, let us see what that what we mean by that.
So, in this particular command you see that
the host name and the user variables are both
interpreted and I would like to interpret
only one of them for whatever reason. So,
we will realize that very shortly. So, let
us see how that is possible. Now you see the
difference in the second command we have used
a backslash which meant that the dollar symbol
is then not interpreted as the first character
of a variable and therefore the entire word
is then not interpreted as a shell variable
and is displayed as it is.
Whereas uh the other variable did not have
the escape sequence of backslash and therefore
it will be interpreted and the value of that
particular shell variable is displayed. So,
you can now see that you can have a possibility
to escape the interpretation. Now why is it
useful? This is useful when you want to pass
on the string to a child shell but you want
the interpretation not to be done by the shell
that is launching that particular command.
Now you may be curious to know how many shell
variables have been defined in the shell that
you are running. So, let us go print env would
actually list a whole bunch of shell variables
and I am scrolling with my mouse and you can
see that each of these lines have an equal
to sign separating the name of the variable
and the value. And you could see that there
are a lot of them and we will learn about
these as we kept ourselves familiarized with
the operating system as well as the command
line environment.
Now you can get the same listing also using
the command env okay there is the same same
listing that you are having and you could
also get the list of variables set using the
command set okay and using this command set.
You would also see certain functions that
have been defined to interpret what you are
typing on the comment line apart from of course
the shell variables that have been defined.
The output is quite long so you may have to
scroll quite a bit before you come to see
the list of variables that were defined. So,
now you see that there are a bunch of variables
that have been defined and they are being
listed by the output of set command. Let us
look at the help man page on print env command
and it says that you could print the all are
part of the environment.
What do we mean by the part of the environment
you could do like this print env and let us
say you give the name of the variable without
the dollar symbol and it would give you the
value of that particular variable. You could
also do that with anything else that has been
defined. Now let us look at how we can escape
the aliasing just the way we have escaped
the uh dollar interpretation you could also
escape an alias.
So, we will try that using the data command.
So, we have tried that date comment in the
past and we have also seen that date comment
can take an option of capital R to print the
date in the farm act usually used in the email
communication. So, let us say I want to alias
the second way of displaying the data for
the default behaviour. So, I will do that
by typing an alias date is equal to and date
minus R.
So, I can then check what is the alias for
the date I need to tell in what way the date
has been aliased and now if you type the date
command the output would be as if the option
-R has been given. So, you could now see the
difference here the date command output here
and the date command output here. So, the
difference is coming because the l a s is
now active. So, this date command you could
actually ask where is it and it is a user
bin date.
So, you could actually execute it directly
using the absolute path. So, I could type
this and you would see that the output is
without the alias namely the default format
that was defined for the date command. And
you could also navigate to the folder where
this particular command is located and you
can execute it from there also. So, I would
go there go to slash user bin and I am giving
the relative path of the date command dot
is for the current territories for dot slash
date is the name of the file that is going
to be executed.
And you would see that it executes the same
way as if you type the date command without
anything before it. Now you can now now let
us say I want to type the date command but
I would like to escape the alias that I have
kept. So, for that you can actually use the
same backslash the way we have escaped the
dollar symbol in the previous example.
So, if you do that then the aliases are all
escaped and you would run the comment with
its default behaviour. So, what we have learned
is that there are multiple ways of executing
commands. You can execute a command by going
to the location where it is placed and using
the relative path for the particular file.
You could execute it directly by typing the
name of that command wherever you are in the
file system you can be in the user bin or
for example you can be in the home directory
just typing it out.
Or you could also type it with a backslash
in front to indicate that you do not want
to use the alias. Now when you type a command
how does the shell find out where is it? This
is actually obtained by looking at the path
variable. So, there is a variable called path.
So, this path variable contains a list of
directories here you can see that the very
first directories user local sbin okay after
that it is user local bin and then it is user
sbin and then user bin and then slash sbin
and then slash bin and so on.
Which means that when I type a command shell
would look up each of these directories in
the sequence from left to right to identify
where is it which directory contains a particular
executable and then executed from there. Now
let us look at the special shell variables
that we have mentioned the first the dollar
zero. So, if you see the output of dollar
zero is the shell name that is currently running
the shell command.
Now we can test it out by launching such an
other shell which may be present in the particular
operating system and trying out the same thing.
So, I would like to now launch and let us
say hey k shell. So, if it was available it
would open and it has opened up and I would
echo dollars zero and it says that it is a
case that is running I come out of it using
exit command. The next special shell variable
that we were discussing is the double dollar
and the double dollar basically gives a number
on the screen which is the process Id.
What it means is that there is a number given
for the process called the batch that is currently
running and interpreting the commands that
we are giving. So, how to know what are the
processes that are running? It is a ps comment
that will help you to know that. So, let us
look at the man page of the ps command. So,
ps command says that it would report a snapshot
of the current earning processes. uh
It says snapshot because the processes keep
changing new processes get launched certain
old processes would finish and close. So,
ps command can tell you what are the processes
that are running right now? And if you see
here it is running two commands batch as well
as the ps command which is what we have just
now run. And you could actually see the output
of the ps command very nicely to know which
process has launched which child process by
using the option double hyphen forest.
So, it would actually display these two characters
to indicate which shell or which process has
launched which other process. And the integers
that are placed in the first column under
the header PID are the process Id numbers.
So, when you type echo double dollar the number
that you get is the same thing as what is
listed again is the batch process when you
run the ps command.
Now that brings us to the discussion about
the ps command you can actually see what all
the processes running in the operating system
right now by using ps and options like -ef
and you would see that a whole bunch of processes
are running. And if you scroll up and you
will see that the very first pid is assigned
to a command which is basically the init.
So, that is a very first process that was
running.
And if you see ppid header that is a parent
process Id. So, which means that which process
I restarted this particular process is what
is listed. So, if you look at the the process
id three it was launched by the parent with
a process id two and that means that rcu underscore
gp process was launched by a process called
k thread b. So, like that you can actually
identify which process has launched which
other process.
So, the parent ideas are available for you
to help with that. Now the ps command with
the -f would actually give you the parent
Id and you could also see that the ps -f command
has the process Id X8615 and it is launched
by a parent 3423. And 3423 is a process Id
of a command batch which is a shell. So, you
can actually see how the child process and
the parent process can be identified using
the output of the ps command.
So, some of the important options for ps are
ps -f to see the parent id also ps -e to see
all the processes that are running and you
could combine them both ps -ef to list the
parent id as well as all the processes that
are running currently in the operating system.
And you could also have the option --forest
to see what all the processes that are running
in a way that is easy for a novice user to
identify.